Add Linux scenario topic to Alloy docs (#3285)
grafana/alloy: docs/sources/monitor/monitor-linux.md

---
canonical: https://grafana.com/docs/alloy/latest/monitor/monitor-linux/
description: Learn how to use Grafana Alloy to monitor Linux servers
menuTitle: Monitor Linux
title: Monitor Linux servers with Grafana Alloy
weight: 225
---

# Monitor Linux servers with {{% param "FULL_PRODUCT_NAME" %}}

The Linux operating system generates a wide range of metrics that you can use to monitor the health and performance of your hardware and operating system.

> With {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}, you can collect your metrics, forward them to a Grafana stack, and create dashboards to monitor your Docker containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}}, you can collect your metrics, forward them to a Grafana stack, and create dashboards to monitor your Linux servers.
```

The [`alloy-scenarios`][scenarios] repository contains complete examples of {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} deployments.
Clone the repository and use the examples to understand how {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} collects, processes, and exports telemetry signals.

> In this example scenario, {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} collects Linux metrics and forwards them to a Loki destination.

Reviewer 2: Looking at the linux scenario we collect both metrics and logs and send metrics to prometheus and logs to loki. Can we clarify that here?

Author: Fixed in a new commit

To create a [dashboard](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/getting-started/build-first-dashboard/#create-a-dashboard) for visualizing metrics and logs:

1. Open your browser and go to [http://localhost:3000/dashboards](http://localhost:3000/dashboards).
1. Download the JSON file for the preconfigured [Linux node dashboard](https://grafana.com/api/dashboards/1860/revisions/37/download).
1. Go to **Dashboards** > **Import**
1. Upload the JSON file.
1. Select the Prometheus data source and click **Import**

This community dashboard provides comprehensive system metrics including CPU, memory, disk, and network usage.

## Understand the {{% param "PRODUCT_NAME" %}} configuration

This example uses a `config.alloy` file to configure {{< param "PRODUCT_NAME" >}} components for metrics and logging.
You can find this file in the cloned repository at `alloy-scenarios/linux/`.

### Configure metrics

The metrics configuration in this example uses nine components:

* `discovery.relabel`
* `prometheus.exporter.unix`
* `prometheus.scrape`
* `prometheus.remote_write`
* `loki.source.journal`
* `local.file_match`
* `loki.source.file`
* `loki.write`
* `livedebugging`

> 

Reviewer: I think `prometheus.exporter.unix` should be listed first, because it's the top level component where the targets come from.

Author: Fixed in a new commit

* `scrape_interval`: The frequency of scraping the target.

```alloy
prometheus.scrape "integrations_node_exporter" {
scrape_interval = "15s"
  targets    = discovery.relabel.integrations_node_exporter.output
  forward_to = [prometheus.remote_write.local.receiver]
}
```

#### `prometheus.remote_write`

The [`prometheus.remote_write`][prometheus.remote_write] component sends metrics to a Prometheus server.
In this example, the component requires the following argument:

* `url`: Defines the full URL endpoint to send metrics to.

This component provides the `prometheus.remote_write.local.receiver` destination for `prometheus.scrape`.

```alloy
prometheus.remote_write "local" {
  endpoint {
    url = "http://prometheus:9090/api/v1/write"
  }
}
```

#### `loki.source.journal`

The [`loki.source.journal`][loki.source.journal] component collects logs from the systemd journal and forwards them to a Loki receiver.
In this example, the component requires the following arguments:

* `max_age`: Only collect logs from the last 24 hours.
* `relabel_rules`: Relabeling rules to apply on log entries.

> * `forward_to`:Send logs to the local Loki instance.

Reviewer 3: nit: indentation
```suggestion
* `forward_to`: Send logs to the local Loki instance.
```
